I think we're trying to understand a
little bit more about China's
involvement in this conflict here right
now. There have been some sort of
reports of possibly some sort of
intervention in the last minute here to
get Iran to agree to this ceasefire.
You know, can you tell us a little more
about what you know on China's role in
all this?
Hi Ivan. I I I don't think I want to use
the term of the intervention because
actually from the Chinese perspective,
China hopes to bring the different
conflicting parties
closer and also together with the
efforts from the regional countries. Of
course with the other including other
international community members. I think
the China's efforts could be
included to into two dimensions. First
of all, China
closely very communicated very closely
with different
members and different states in this
region. For example, China's foreign
minister Wang Yi
has already made
countless calls. I cannot remember
exactly the number but countless calls
during the past one months with the
regional countries, Qatar, Saudi, even
Iran and also other very major powers
including maybe Russia and maybe
Pakistan to try to enhance the very
consensus over the ongoing war. That's
the that means the war should be
suspended and the peace should come
back. And also on the other hand, China
and
some other regional countries
particularly Pakistan put forward the
so-called five-point initiative not long
ago according for the end of the war. So
that's why
already tried our best to bring the two
different conflicting parties together
and we are very happy that the war now
come into the very opportunity of peace
and it's very crucial for everybody to
make the decision. So but no matter how
I think it's very optimistic moment
right now. Ivan. Yeah, optimistic in
terms of the amount of campaigning that
China is doing. You know, what what's
different this time? I I bring it back
to Ukraine. When there were calls in the
international community at the time for
China to really try to step in a bit
more diplomatically, but but China never
did. What's different this time, you
think?
No, no, no. China actually did a lot of
things. I mean, what what I don't I
don't quite understand that why there
were so so many criticism that okay,
China should do this, China should do
that. On one hand, China is strong, but
not that enough to influence to be able
to influence everybody, every country's
leaders' decision over the very specific
and particular issue. That is impossible
because China is only a normal country
in the international community. China
cannot determine the other countries'
decision and cannot determine the other
countries' behaviors, including Iran and
the United States. They are independent
countries based upon their own
independent decision-making circle. So,
that's why China can only try to
persuade and try to give opinion to
their leaders at at home and cannot
determine what they could do. And also,
on the other hand, I think China has
already tried to
try to do a lot of things from the
United Nations Security Council level,
from the from the multilateral and
bilateral level, try to give a lot of
the positive atmosphere for the under
which that the kind of the peace
opportunities could be enhanced and
cultivated. So, that's why I think has
China has already done a lot. And we can
And also, last but not least, the China
is not the only country who contributes
to the for the peace process. A lot of
other countries, as we have discussed,
for example, Turkey, for example, Egypt,
for example, particularly the Pakistan,
all has already done a lot of things for
the bringing the different conflicting
parties together. So, that's why I think
we could say that this is a very
important result, positive result of the
ceasefire uh reached not only by China,
but also on based upon the very
bilateral efforts from the international
community. That is very, very important.
You want?
Mhm. So, Wang Yi, this is David. So,
what then
would China's next be?
I I think China will try to first of all
David, I think
you you you made put forward a very
crucial question and what could be the
future.
I think China hopes that the
United States and Iran that their
negotiation could be successful although
we we know it's very difficult because
if you compare what the United States
before they put forward the so-called
15-point plan with the Iran put forward
the so-called 10-point plan. Actually,
everything is opposite. Everything is
conflicting. So,
let let's be personally let's be frank.
I think they will be this would be a
very very long and tough negotiation
between the two conflicting parties when
the crisis and uncertainties of going
back to war still remain and remain very
high. And also we cannot forget that
some countries in the region and some
actors in this region for example, the
Yemen Houthi, the Israel, the Hezbollah
from Lebanon they still have the
motivations to restart the war. So, it's
there were still a lot of uncertainties
out of the control from United States,
out of the control from Iran. So, I
think China hopes that the peace would
peace negotiation will continue the
peace opportunities could remain. And
also on the other hand, I think China
would try together with other regional
countries to try to
maintain this kind of the bridge for
communication between the different
parties because right now the most
biggest difficulty for United States and
Iran is that there is no reliable
communication channel between the two
countries because traditionally the Gulf
Arab states they are the channel. But
now they stand to to the very large
extent to the opposite side of Iran. So,
that's why I think China will continue
to contribute. Yeah, yeah even please.
>> Wang Jianlin you had a good point about
you know, there's only so much China can
do, right? You know,
Beijing has influence on on certain
countries in in different degrees and
different levels. I'm just wondering in
terms of the the Iran situation,
why do you think Iran would listen to
China? What what leverage do you think
Beijing has on Tehran?
I also hope that of course Iran will
listen to Chinese words. Like I mean but
but I don't think Iran will do that.
First of all it's a it's a it's a very
very beautiful misunderstanding that
Iran will follow other people's advices
and other countries advices. If Iran
really did follow the advices or so
called the order of the other country,
there would be no 1960 1979 Iran Islamic
Revolution because with that time Iran
does not want to follow the order from
United States. They overthrow the the
the elder the older king regime and
established a new Islamic regime. So
that's why Iran's Islamic Republic is
independent country without the
necessities of following other countries
orders and other countries direction. So
that's why China just the hopes to give
advices and to give the advices not only
to Iran but also to the Gulf Arab
states. So just a days ago China and the
United Nations Security Council they
vetoed
the the proposal from the Gulf Arab
states to for example to to to try to
militarize the this kind of the Gulf
Arab regions situation. I we call it a
very dangerous because we don't want the
the the region going deeper into the war
circle. So that's why China hopes to
give advices because you know when the
country is like people, they were in the
war, they become irrational. And they so
that's why the rational advices from the
partners are necessary and important. So
that's why I think China's contribution
should not be concluded as kind of the
order but it's just a kind of the good
advices and good kind of the rational
advices suggestions to Iran that we hope
Iran could listen. And we are happy that
Iran all together with the other
regional countries listen No no actually
to some extent followed the advices from
China and other regional countries. So
this is very good news. The first
the the Donald Trump's trip to to China
was postponed because of what's
happening now and I think we're still
scheduled for that trip to Beijing in
mid-May. Can I just ask maybe a direct
question?
Does can that summit between Chinese
President Xi Jinping and US President
Donald Trump still take place if the war
continues or
is a cessation of of hostilities almost
a precondition for that summit to take
place?
Well, of course I I hope that every kind
of the summits between China and the
United States could preview successfully
and we also we know there is still some
kind of the interventions from the
Iranian issue and we hope that Iranian
issue would come to the end with the
peace and stability come back to this
region which is also welcomed by
everybody I think including by United
States and the Iran himself. But we have
to know there is still uncertainties. So
your question is very crucial. Will this
influence the China and the United
States summit? I think although many
people will say okay it's a kind of the
crisis. It's a kind of uncertainty for
the two countries over the international
issue because China does not want the
war to continue and United China believe
that United States
war into Iran to some extent actually is
based upon this unilateralism
decision. But the problem is that I
think China and the United States shared
very very common understandings over the
future of the war that is the war should
be ended. So it means we actually have
the kind of opportunity to share the the
the prospect of the future over the
Iranian issue over the regional issue
that is the region should come back to
the stability that the war should be
suspended. Although there were some
difficulties and divisions in the region
that means that the different sides
should be finished and should overcome
this kind of the divisions through the
political and the dialogue ways. So
that's why I think China and the United
States we have still have a lot of
understandings, uh common
understandings. Although we have maybe
misunderstandings or maybe the different
views before, but I think it's an
opportunity to further enhance the
consensus between the two countries.
This is a very important thing. I think
we we can create something much more
positive uh by the two leaders together.
David.
Uh Wang Yi, I want to
bring up something that one of our
columnists had mentioned, uh Christian
Lequid about really the role that
China's playing in the international
world order now. That it's almost like
an effective opposition sort of voice
to what we're hearing from the US,
right? For many governments, the issue
is not really managing China, it's
navigating the uncertainty generated by
Washington. In terms of what regional
countries are looking at the situation
here right now, China seems like that
sort of stabilizing
sort of voice.
How do you think the rest of the world
should be
Does it change the calculus on how
nations look at China now in some ways?
Does it become, you know, are they
forced to kind of choose sides in a way
that maybe does
uh put China back in favor?
Uh well, I I first thought I I feel very
happy because when somebody saying that
right now that as you mentioned, say
that United States and other countries
are the troublemakers and China become
now the
the trouble enders. So, that's why I
think it's a maybe the very positive
praise for the China. But
but we actually I think from my point of
view that we actually living in the
world where everything is overlapped,
where every kind of the relations
interacting with each other. So, we
cannot say that some countries are
making troubles where other some other
countries are trying to manage this
trouble. This is unfair because China
cannot We cannot say that China should
manage every crisis, every troubles made
up by made up by other countries. It's
we call it unfair. And also on the other
hand, we cannot forget that we are
living in the country which is where is
everything interacted with is with each
other. So, China alone cannot manage
every troubles and because with some
other countries that still making
troubles, we cannot say that the China
can do it alone. And we should work
closely together with other countries,
particularly as we see what has happened
between United States and Iran. Of
course, China do something and try to
bring the different conflicting parties
closer, try to manage to melt down the
division between the two different
conflicting parties, try to alleviate
the tension in this region. But we
cannot forget that also United States
decision is very crucial. That is they
want the peace dialogues with Iran. And
the Iran's opinion is also very crucial.
They want try the dialogues with United
States and also Pakistan is also
important because they started
communication channel. This is very very
necessary, right? Highly necessary right
now. So, that's why I think China's role
is important, but I think China's role
alone cannot work. So, that's why we
need everybody's efforts right now,
Yvon.
The
the
So far, I think
China has certainly put
uh
diplomatic pressure as with others for
the both sides to come
to come together.
Uh this is a two-part question and
forgive me, I I might spend a little bit
of time just flushing out the concept.
So, what when I look at countries
it in the Asia Pacific that are US
allies, Japan, Korea, Philippines come
to mind. You know, that alliance
is also tethered to a security guarantee
from the United States. And I wonder as
we pivot further into the future and as
people look at look to China,
can can can folks look to China to
provide, this is a two-part part of it,
somewhat of security guarantees that the
US somewhat provides their allies
currently? And if China needs to do more
specifically
in maintaining peace in the Middle East,
do you think China has a role to play in
guaranteeing security?
Say in the Strait of Hormuz or in the or
or in the Arab Peninsula.
I think it's actually what is happening
in Hormuz is suggested very clearly that
only military way, only military
guarantee cannot guarantee anything.
Because as we can see that when Iran
started to close Hormuz, even United
States has the most
powerful military forces in this world,
even they have the the aircraft carrier
groups near the Hormuz Strait, they
could do nothing. The
the Hormuz Strait is under closure.
Iran used only very simple weapons. I
mean the drones and the short
short-range missiles, they could close
the Hormuz Strait and United States just
could watch and do anything do nothing
else. So that's why I think as you
mentioned very it is very good that in
the East Asian Asian Pacific areas,
there are a lot of countries who are
allies of United States. I think it is
because of the result of history
because in the history of
particularly in the Cold War this
country they choose to stand with United
States. This is a continuation of the
Cold War. So from the China's
perspective and China's thinking method
that we should to some extent reform
this kind of the thinking method. It
means that only military guarantee
cannot make everybody safe. It only make
everybody rivalry, make everybody
standing against each other and
preparing for the future war. So when
the war started or even under the
preparation of the war, nobody is safe
and everybody will affected negatively.
So that's why the new thinking method
and security method should be
established. That is the end of the war
and try to solve the problems through
the diplomatic way and through the
political dialogue. Everybody should
contribute over the the the the the kind
of the the prosperous co-shared future.